[Music]
hey here's a quick trip down memory lane
I had just turned 16 I had my first ever
job it was at Baskin Robbins scooping
ice cream
and I just got my first car hotdog was I
excited to see that it had a cassette
tape player if you don't know what that
is exactly you can google it anyway
man oh man I thought to myself now I
don't have to listen to the radio while
I'm driving I can choose what songs I
want to listen to fast forward a few
years later all right a few decades
later and I'm now using bluetooth to
play music from my phone through my car
speakers my how the times have changed
so how does it all work my wireless
speakers earphones hands-free calling
what's the magic behind Bluetooth check
before I get into that let's take
another trip down memory lane only this
time we're taking a side trip the idea
of what we call Bluetooth today was
first introduced back in 1989 dr. Nils
ride back who was the chief technology
officer at Ericsson mobile and inventor
Johann Ullman had this revolutionary
idea to develop a pair of wireless
headsets because well let's be honest
cords and wires are annoying it was a
major undertaking so they brought dr.
Yap Hartson on to the project a mere
five years later he'd be the engineer
who made the breakthrough and came out
with the first protocol it took a few
more years to perfect the technology but
finally in 1999 they presented their
first hands-free headset to the world at
the Comdex computer exposition and trade
show in Las Vegas they even won Best in
Show hmm
sometimes things that happen in Vegas
don't necessarily stay in Vegas after
all well this thing was dubbed Bluetooth
which then begs the question where does
the strange name come from well at the
time three companies were working
separately to create short-range radio
technologies that would connect
computers and different devices using
shortwave frequencies but since the
invention was in its early stages Intel
Ericsson and Nokia decided that the best
way to proceed was to create a
single Wireless standard gym hardac who
was working for Intel happened to be
reading a historical book about the
Viking King Harald Bluetooth göransson
United Denmark in Norway that story
inspired hardac to propose his idea of
calling this single short link device
that would unite communications
Bluetooth so that was it and in case
you're wondering how the king got the
nickname legend has it that he had a
rotten tooth that looked kind of bluish
anyway they paid tribute to the great
Viking King when they came up with the
logo hmm
just looks like a bee to me but if you
examine it a little closer and you
happen to know the Nordic alphabet then
you'll see that the logo is formed from
two different symbols they represent the
initials of the King H and B for Harald
Bluetooth oh sorry to geek out there on
the history let's get into the meat and
potatoes of this mysterious Bluetooth
technology your tooth works a lot like
Wi-Fi it uses radio wave to send data
between devices at short distances now
whereas Wi-Fi uses radio waves to
transmit data between your router where
your Wi-Fi comes from and your device
bluetooth does it between devices so
basically if two things have a Bluetooth
option then they can transmit data
between each other this communication of
sorts is measured in gigahertz for both
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi it's usually at the
2.4 gigahertz frequency that means those
radio waves imagine them just as they
are waves are moving in hordes and
really fast that is 2.4 billion waves
per second that's why when you say turn
your Bluetooth mouse on the cursor
starts whipping around your computer
screen in an instant now even though
Bluetooth still works at the 2.4
gigahertz frequency just like Wi-Fi it
mostly works at shorter distances and
uses much weaker signals just 1
milliwatt of power you know those little
laser pointers you can't love so much
they put out 5 milliwatts of power so
that goes to show you how we just one is
bluetooth doesn't need as much power as
why
find us because it's not really doing as
much work but the cool thing is that
Bluetooth can connect to eight devices
at the same time without any
interference from other wireless items
like garage doors or baby monitors Wi-Fi
can have issues with that so here's a
real-life example let's say you're
listening to music from your laptop
using your wireless headphones and
you're also typing on your computer with
your wireless keyboard the Bluetooth
transmitters in both your computer and
your devices use 79 different
frequencies in that range to prevent
your music from getting in the way of
your keyboard it changes frequencies
1600 times every second when you try to
connect the Bluetooth device with your
phone then a sort of conversation takes
place between the two of them amen how
you doing oh not bad they present their
data and decide on whether they need to
exchange information or if one of them
needs to control the other you want me
to do what after this short digital
dialogue ends and the two devices agree
on their roles they connect together to
form a network that Bluetooth network of
connected devices is called a piconet
once their connection is established
they begin their frequency hopping in
order to continually stay connected and
avoid interference you can even take a
device with you to another room and
it'll keep working as long as you don't
go too far that is Bluetooth is such a
huge part of our everyday lives yet most
of the time it goes unnoticed so if
you're wondering what devices use
bluetooth nowadays the answer is almost
all of them phones headphones earbuds
speakers stereos TVs cameras cars
tablets game consoles you name it and if
you were to watch them all over
it would be quite a spectacle imagine if
you could see that piconet of radial
frequencies
swirling from all these Bluetooth
devices in your home
you've got your wireless mouse and
computer chatting with each other your
Bluetooth speaker has its own
conversation going with your phone and
the best part is that none of them so
rudely intervene in the others
conversations that's not only thanks to
frequency hopping it's also because each
device has its own address programmed by
the manufacturer so even if your
wireless mouse gets a message from your
TV it'll just automatically ignore it
because they have different addresses
but the way Bluetooth works raises a few
security questions as well just like all
wireless networking setups there's
always the legitimate concern of sending
personal data through radio waves and
that data falling into the wrong hands
when Bluetooth first came out it was
really easy for someone to access your
data without your permission but over
time this technology has become more
secure Bluetooth manufacturers are aware
of the risks so they've already done a
lot to make devices more protected
against security threats you see in
almost all of our personal gadgets
there's the trusted devices option that
enables you to share data without
permission while others need permission
to access your device but let's not
forget about spam there's this trend
called bluejacking where a person or
company can send you their electronic
business card or an ad as a text message
using bluetooth of course when you see
that you either ignore it or panic but
this is something that mostly happens in
public places where everyone is using
their phones you can prevent it from
happening to you by making your
Bluetooth device non discoverable when
you're out and about and if it does
happen to you don't worry just turn your
Bluetooth off and remove the attackers
device from your trusted ones now with
those blue jackers busted let's talk
about the health concerns unfortunately
there's not enough evidence and research
done on Bluetooth to determine if it's
harmful for people or not and it's also
quite tricky because Bluetooth waves are
just one part
of the wireless smog that surrounds us
every single day but perhaps this will
be comforting to know the amount of non
ionizing radiation present and Bluetooth
headphones is a lot less than what's in
a typical cell phone so if you're
worried about Bluetooth affecting your
health you should probably give up your
phone first and still your phone isn't a
cause for alarm either there are
regulatory organizations put in place to
keep the public safe from being exposed
to too many radio frequencies from our
devices for example the Federal
Communications Commission checks that
cell phone manufacturers don't sell
devices that go over what scientists say
is the limit of how many radio
frequencies the human body can absorb
from one gadget that number is called
the specific absorption rate SAR and you
can always check which models have the
lowest if you're in the market for a
phone so don't worry too much about it
the health aspect is always under check
and is constantly being studied all in
all I still say Bluetooth is a lot
better than getting tangled up in cords
and having to change CDs or cassette
tapes in your car so do you use
Bluetooth in your everyday life and what
for let me know down in the comments if
you've learned something new today then
give this video a like and share it with
your friends but hey don't become non
discoverable just yet we have over 2000
cool videos for you to check out all you
have to do is pick the left or right
video click on it and enjoy stay on the
bright side of life